.TH EPSTOOL 1 "2005-06-10" "Martin Pitt and Russell Lang"
.SH NAME
epstool \- Edit preview images and fix bounding boxes in EPS files.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B epstool
.I command
[
.I options
]
.I inputfile outputfile

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B epstool
is a utility to create or extract preview images in EPS files. It can
also calculate optimal bounding boxes.

.SS "EPS (Encapsulated PostScript Format)"
EPS is a specialised form of a PostScript file that complies
with the Document Structuring Conventions (DSC) and is intended
to be embedded inside another PostScript file.
An EPS file must contain a special first line that identifies
it as an EPS file (e.g. \fB%!PS\-Adobe\-3.0 EPSF\-3.0\fR) 
and it must contain a \fB%%BoundingBox:\fR line.
The EPS file only draws within the rectangle defined by the bounding box.
The PostScript code must avoid using PostScript operators
that would interfere with the embedding.  These include
operators with global effects such as changing the page size
and changing the half tone screen.

.SS PREVIEWS

EPS files may contain a preview to be used by programs that can't
interpret the PostScript code. There are three ways to add a preview
to an EPS file.

.IP Interchange
This preview is included within PostScript comments in a section
marked %%BeginPreview: / %%EndPreview. The actual image data is stored
in hexadecimal format. This format is most commonly used on Unix.

.IP DOS\ EPS
The preview is a TIFF or Windows Metafile. A DOS EPS file has a 30
byte binary header which gives offsets and lengths for the PostScript,
TIFF and Windows Metafile sections. You can't send a DOS EPS file
directly to a printer \- you have to remove the binary header and
preview first. This format is most commonly used on MS\-Windows.

.IP PICT
The preview is in PICT format stored in the resource fork of the file.
This format is most commonly used on the Macinstosh.
Epstool provides limited support for this format.

.SH "COMMANDS (one only):"

.TP
.B \-t4, \-\-add\-tiff4\-preview
Add a TIFF 4 preview. The preview is monochrome and is intended for
use with old programs that won't read TIFF6, such as Word Perfect 5.1
for DOS.

.TP
.B \-t6u, \-\-add\-tiff6u\-preview
Add a TIFF 6 uncompressed preview. See 
.B \-\-add\-tiff6p\-preview
for how to
add a greyscale or monochrome preview.

.TP
.B \-t6p, \-\-add\-tiff6p\-preview
Add a TIFF 6 preview compressed with packbits (simple run length
encoding). The preview will normally be full colour, but you can make
it greyscale by adding the option
.B \-\-device bmpgray
or 
.B \-\-device pgmraw,
or monochrome using
.B \-\-device bmpmono
or
.B \-\-device pbmraw\fR.

.TP
.B \-tg, \-\-add\-tiff\-preview
Add a TIFF preview using ghostscript to generate the TIFF file. You
must specify a suitable TIFF device using 
.B \-\-device\fR. If you want a compressed monochrome image, you might use
.B \-\-device tiffg3\fR.

.TP
.B \-i, \-\-add\-interchange\-preview
Add a monochrome interchange preview.

.TP
.B \-w, \-\-add\-metafile\-preview
Add a Windows Metafile (WMF) preview. The metafile will contain a
bitmap, not vector information. The preview will normally be full
colour. See
.B \-\-add\-tiff6p\-preview
for how to add a greyscale or monochrome preview.

.TP
.B \-\-add\-pict\-preview
Add a Mac PICT preview.
EPSF files with PICT previews can generally be used only on Mac computers.
The preview will be full colour.  
The AppleSingle and MacBinary formats will contain the EPSF and 
the preview.  The AppleDouble or Resource format will contain the 
preview only and needs to accompany the original EPSF file.
To specify the file format use 
\fB\-\-mac\-single\fR, \fB\-\-mac\-double\fR, \fB\-\-mac\-binary\fR
or \fB\-\-mac\-rsrc\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-add\-user\-preview \fI filename
Add a user supplied image as a preview. The image can be a Windows
bitmap, a PBMPLUS file, a TIFF image or a Windows Metafile. Window
bitmaps and PBMPLUS files will be converted to TIFF6 compressed with
packbits. TIFF and Windows Metafile images will be added unchanged.

.TP
.B \-\-bitmap
Create a bitmap of the area within the EPS bounding box. The bitmap
type must be specified with \fB\-\-device\fR.
If processing a DCS 2.0 file, the separation can be specified 
with \fB\-\-page\-number\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-copy
Copy the EPS file. This is generally used with the
.B \-\-bbox
option to update the bounding box.

.TP
.B \-\-dcs2\-multi
Convert DCS 2.0 separations to multiple files. See DCS 2.0. If the
output name is out.eps, then the separations would be named
out.eps.Cyan etc.

.TP
.B \-\-dcs2\-single
Convert DCS 2.0 separations to a single file. See DCS 2.0.

.TP
.B \-\-dcs2\-report
Write the separation names, lengths and CMYK values to standard
output. This can be used to identify if a DCS 2.0 file is missing the
composite page or preview.

.TP
.B \-\-dump
Display some information about the file type and DSC comments.

.TP
.B \-p, \-\-extract\-postscript
Extract the PostScript section from a DOS EPS file.

.TP
.B \-v, \-\-extract\-preview
Extract the preview section from a DOS EPS file.

.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display a summary of the epstool commands and options.

.TP
.B \-\-test\-eps
Partially test if a file complies with the EPSF specification.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-bbox
Calculate the bounding box using the ghostscript bbox device and
update in the EPS file.

.TP
.B \-\-combine\-separations \fI filename
Combine the separations of the input DCS 2.0 file
with those of this file.  It is an error if the bounding boxes do
not match or they contain separations with the same name.
This option must be used with 
\fB\-\-dcs2\-multi\fR or \fB\-\-dcs2\-single\fR.
The composite page may later need to be updated with 
\fB\-\-replace\-composite\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-combine\-tolerance \fI pts
When using \fB\-\-combine\-separations\fR, 
allow the bounding boxes to vary by up to \fIpts\fR points.  
The default is 0 so the bounding boxes must match exactly.

.TP
.B \-\-custom\-colours \fI filename
When using
.B \-\-replace\-composite
on a DCS 2.0 file, use the colours specified in this file in
preference to those specified in the composite page.

.TP
.B \-d, \-\-debug
Be more verbose about progress. Do not remove temporary files.

.TP
.B \-\-device\fI name
Specify a ghostscript device to be used when creating the preview or
bitmap. For
.B \-\-add\-tiff\-preview
this must be one of the ghostscript tiff devices (e.g. tiffg3,
tiff24nc).  For any other preview, it must be one of the bmp or
pbmplus devices (e.g. bmpgray, bmp16m, pgmraw, ppmraw). For bitmap
output (\fB\-\-bitmap\fR) it can be any ghostscript bitmap device.

.TP
.B \-\-doseps\-reverse
When writing a DOS EPS file (TIFF or WMF preview), the default
is to write the PostScript before the preview.  
Using \fB\-\-doseps\-reverse\fR puts the preview before
the PostScript section, which is required by some buggy programs.
Either order is correct.

.TP
.B \-\-dpi\fI resolution
Set the resolution of the preview or bitmap. The default is 72 dpi.

.TP
.B \-\-dpi\-render\fI resolution
Render at a higher resolution set by 
.B \-\-dpi\-render
, then downsample to the resolution set by 
.B \-\-dpi\fR. This works when adding a preview image or using
.B \-\-replace\-composite
, but not when using
.B \-\-bitmap.
This improves the
preview quality when the original contains a pre\-rendered image and
.B \-\-dpi\-render
is set to match the original target printer.

.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-information
Ignore information messages from the DSC parser.  Use at your own risk.
These messages usually indicate that something is wrong with an EPS
file, but that most EPS handlers probably won't care.
An example is a line with more than 255 characters.

.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-warnings
Ignore warnings from the DSC parser.  Use at your own risk.
These messages are usually about faults in the DSC comments
that are recoverable by \fBepstool\fR, but may confuse other EPS
handlers.  An example is a bounding box that incorrectly
uses floating point numbers instead of integer.

.TP
.B \-\-ignore\-errors
Ignore warnings from the DSC parser. Use at your own risk. You really
should fix the EPS file first.

.TP
.B \-\-gs command
Specify the name the ghostscript program. On Unix the default is gs.
On Windows, 
.B epstool
will check the registry for installed versions of ghostscript and use
the latest, otherwise it will use gswin32c.exe.

.TP
.B \-\-gs\-args\fI arguments
Specify additional Ghostscript arguments. This might be used to select
anti\-aliasing with "\-dTextAlphaBits=4 \-dGraphicsAlphaBits=4"

.TP
.B \-\-output\fI filename
Specify the output file (instead of using the second file parameter).
Using the filename \fB\-\fR causes epstool to write to 
standard output, which requires the use of \fB\-\-quiet\fR.

.TP
.B \-\-mac\-binary
When adding a PICT preview, use the MacBinary I format.
for the Mac

.TP
.B \-\-mac\-double
When adding a PICT preview, use the AppleDouble format
for the Mac.

.TP
.B \-\-mac\-rsrc
When adding a PICT preview, use the Resource format
for the Mac.  

.TP
.B \-\-mac\-single
When adding a PICT preview, use the AppleSingle format
for the Mac.  

.TP
.B \-\-missing\-separations
When writing a DCS 2.0 file, epstool
will normally fail if a separation is missing.
When this option is used, it will remove references to
missing separations when writing the file.

.TP
.B \-\-page\-number\fI page
When creating a bitmap with \fB\-\-device\fR from
a DCS 2.0 file, \fIpage\fR specifies the separation to be used.
Page 1 is the composite and page 2 is the first separation.
Use \fB\-\-dcs2\-report\fR to get the list of separations.

.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Try to run without writing to standard output.

.TP
.B \-\-rename\-separation\fI oldname  newname
When copying a DCS 2.0 file with 
\fB\-\-dcs2\-multi\fR or \fB\-\-dcs2\-single\fR,
rename separation with \fIoldname\fR to \fInewname\fR.
This option implies \fB\-\-missing\-separations\fR.
It is assumed that the new name is just an alias for the same colour
and that the CMYK or RGB values for the separation are not changed.
This option may be used multiple times.
This must be used if the input file incorrectly has two separations 
of the same name.

.TP
.B \-\-replace\-composite
Some DCS 2.0 files do not have an image in the composite page. This
option replaces the composite page with a CMYK image derived from the
separations. This option must be used with 
.B \-\-dcs2\-multi
or
.B \-\-dcs2\-single\fR. See also the options 
.B \-\-dpi
and
.B \-\-custom\-colours\fR.


.SH MACINTOSH
The Macintosh does not use a flat file system.  
Each file can have a data fork and a resource fork.
EPSF files have the PostScript in the data fork,
and optionally have a preview in the resource fork
as a PICT image.  In addition, file type is obtained
from the finder info rather than a file extension.
File types use a four character code such as "EPSF"
or "PICT".
When Macintosh files are copied to a foreign file system,
the resource fork may be left behind. 
Alternatives to retain the resource fork are to package the 
finder data, data fork and resource fork in a single MacBinary 
or AppleSingle file, or to put the data fork in a flat file 
and the finder info and resource fork in an AppleDouble file.
The Mac OSX finder will handle AppleDouble files automatically
when copying files to and from a foreign file system.
When copying \fItest.eps\fR to a foreign file system,
the data fork would be written as \fItest.eps\fR
and the finder info and resource fork to the AppleDouble file
\fI._test.eps\fR or 
\fI.AppleDouble/test.eps\fR.

Epstool can read MacBinary and AppleSingle files.
It can write MacBinary I, AppleSingle, AppleDouble or Resource files.
Files written by epstool will have type \fIEPSF\fR
and creator \fIMSWD\fR.
When adding a preview to \fItest.eps\fR,
it is suggested that you create the MacBinary
file \fItest.eps.bin\fR.  
On a Macintosh computer you then need to extract it with StuffIt Expander.
Another alternative is to write the AppleDouble file
to \fI._test.eps\fR then copy \fBboth files\fR
to a file system accessible to a Mac computer.

If the output file name starts with \fI.\fR then
AppleDouble will be assumed, 
otherwise if it ends with \fI.as\fR then 
AppleSingle will be assumed, 
otherwise if it ends with \fI.rsrc\fR or \fI/rsrc\fR then 
Resource will be assumed, 
otherwise MacBinary will be assumed.
When writing a MacBinary file, it is recommended that you end 
the filename in \fI.bin\fR.
To force the file type, use
\fB\-\-mac\-single\fR,
\fB\-\-mac\-double\fR,
\fB\-\-mac\-binary\fR
or 
\fB\-\-mac\-rsrc\fR.

On Mac OS X you can access a file's resource fork from command 
line tools by appending \fI/rsrc\fR to the original file name. 
The easiest way to add a preview to the file \fItest.eps\fR 
on Mac OS X is to let epstool write in \fB\-\-mac-rsrc\fR format 
to \fItest.eps/rsrc\fR (see \fBExamples\fR).

.SH DESKTOP COLOR SEPARATIONS (DCS 2.0)
The Desktop Color Separation (DCS) image file format contains
a low resolution preview, a main file with the full resolution
composite image, and colour separations with full resolution
separated plates.
The separations will typically contain Cyan, Magenta, Yellow,
Black and possibly spot colours.
There are two versions of DCS 2.0.

.TP
Multiple File
The main file contains \fI%%PlateFile: (name) EPS Local filename\fR
comments which give the filenames of the separation plates.
The main file may contain a low resolution DOS EPS preview.
The separation files do not contain previews.

.TP
Single File
This is an abuse of the EPS specification.
The single file contains the main file and the separations
concatenated together, which makes the DSC comments incorrect.
The main file specifies the byte offsets to the separations using
\fI%%PlateFile: (name) EPS #offset size\fR.
The single file may then be placed inside a DOS EPS file
with a low resolution preview.
By default, epstool writes single file DCS 2.0.

.P
Epstool can add previews to single and multiple file DCS 2.0.
It can split single file DCS 2.0 into multiple files and vice
versa.  This allows a single file DCS 2.0 to be split,
the composite image replaced, a new preview created, 
and then be recombined into a single file.

Some DCS 2.0 files do not have an image in the composite page.
To determine if the composite page does not contain an image,
use \fB\-\-dcs2\-report\fR and look to see if the composite
section is very short.
Using \fB\-\-dcs2\-single \-\-replace\-composite\fR replaces
the composite page with the headers of the original composite page
and a body containing a CMYK image derived from the separations.
Set the resolution of the CMYK image using \fB\-\-dpi\fR.

When replacing the composite page with a CMYK image using
\fB\-\-replace\-composite\fR, the \fB\-\-custom\-colours\fR 
option is useful for dealing with DCS 2.0 files that have incorrect
CMYK colours, for example specifying that the varnish layer is grey.  
Each line of the CMYK colours file is formatted like a DSC
\fI%%CMYKCustomColor:\fR or \fI%%RGBCustomColor:\fR 
line, as shown in the example below.

.P
%%CMYKCustomColor: 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Varnish 
.P
%%CMYKCustomColor: 1.00 0.68 0.00 0.12 (Dark Blue)
.P
%%RGBCustomColor: 0.5 0.0 0.0 (Dark Red)

DCS2 files should not have two separations with the same name.
Epstool will not allow a DCS2 output file to have duplicate 
separation names.  
Use \fB\-\-rename\-separation\fR to resolve this.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
Add colour preview (24bit/pixel) to EPS file
  epstool \-t6p tiger.eps output.eps

.TP
Add TIFF (G3 Fax) preview to tiger.eps.
  epstool \-\-add\-tiff\-preview \-\-device tiffg3 tiger.eps output.eps
.P
Any GS TIFF device can be used, e.g. tiffg4, tiffpack

.TP
Extract TIFF preview from tiger.eps
  epstool \-v tiger.eps tiger.tif

.TP
Fix incorrect %%BoundingBox then add TIFF4 preview.
  epstool \-\-bbox \-t4 golfer.eps output.eps

.TP
Adjust the BoundingBox of an existing EPS file, but don't add a preview:
  epstool \-\-copy \-\-bbox input.eps output.eps

.TP
Add user supplied Windows Metafile to EPS file.
  epstool \-\-add\-user\-preview logo.wmf logo.eps output.eps
.P
Typically used when an application can export EPS and WMF separately
but can't export EPS with WMF preview.

.TP
Add a PICT preview and write an AppleDouble file.
  epstool \-\-add\-pict\-preview \-\-mac\-double tiger.eps ._tiger.eps
.P
To be used by a Mac, both \fItiger.eps\fR and 
\fI._tiger.eps\fR need to be on a foreign file system 
accessible to the Mac.

.TP
Add a PICT preview, overwriting the existing resources.
 epstool \-\-add\-pict\-preview \-\-mac\-rsrc tiger.eps tiger.eps/rsrc
.P
On Mac OS X you can access a file's resource fork from command line 
tools by appending "/rsrc" to the file's original name. 

.SH NOTES

When adding a WMF preview to an EPS file using 
\fB\-add\-user\-preview filename\fP, the
placeable metafile header is removed from the metafile as it is put 
into the EPS file.
When extracting a WMF preview from an EPS file, a placeable metafile
header is created from the EPS BoundingBox information.  
This placeable metafile header assumes that the WMF has its origin 
at (0,0), which might not be correct.

When epstool is creating a TIFF or WMF preview,
it will convert palette colour images into 24\-bit/pixel.

The environment variable TEMP should point to a writeable directory
for temporary files.  If not defined, /tmp will be used for Unix
and the current directory will be used for other platforms.


.SH AUTHOR
.B epstool
was written by Russell Lang <gsview@ghostgum.com.au>
.PP
This man page was contributed by Martin Pitt <martin@piware.de> for
the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).

