@c This file is generated automatically by the packages munge-texi.pl.

\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename database.info
@settitle database_doc
@c %**end of header

@c Nowadays the predined function index has entries for each @deftypefn
@c in additiont to each @findex.
@defcodeindex mfn

@copying
General documentation for the database package for Octave.

Copyright @copyright{} @email{Olaf Till <i7tiol@@t-online.de>}

You can redistribute this documentation and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This documentation is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General
Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this documentation; if not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@end copying

@include macros.texi

@macro mysee
@ifhtml
see
@end ifhtml
@end macro

@titlepage
@title General documentation for the documentation package for Octave
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c No table of contents. The table would occupy most of the top node in
@c html and IMHO misleads the user to use the table instead of the menu
@c structure of the nodes, which would let some information unused.
@c
@c @contents

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Top
@top General documentation for the database package for Octave

@ifhtml
The info version of this document is accessible, after package
installation, from the Octave commandline with @code{database_doc()}.
@end ifhtml

This documentation applies to version 2.4.2 of the database
package.

The database package enables accessing SQL databases from
Octave. Differences between database implementations will inevitably
cause some of this packages functions to be specific for a certain
implementation. Currently, however, this package only supports the
Postgresql database. Later additions might support further databases,
and possibly some general functions (with only very basic
functionality), which can be used for all backends, will also be
provided.

This documentation currently describes the concepts of SQL access in
'database' and the details for Postgresql. Familiarity with SQL and the
database implementation (Postgresql) is assumed.

@menu
* Installation::                Installation hints.
* Concept::                     Introduction and package concept.
* SQL data types::              Representation in Octave of types
                                  defined by SQL.
* Arbitrary Octave types::      Storing arbitrary Octave types in a
                                  database.
* Setting options::             Functions for setting or retrieving
                                  options.
* Documentation::               Function database_doc to view
                                  documentation.

Specific databases
* Postgresql::                  Description of access to Postgresql
                                  databases.

Indices
* Function index::              Index of functions in database.
* Concept index::               Concept index.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Installation
@chapter Installation hints

Maybe your distribution provides the database package.

If not, or if you want a newer version, Octaves @code{pkg} command
allows building the package from source and installing it. Note that you
have to @code{load} any Octave package before you can use it. See
Octaves documentation of @code{pkg}.

In building from source with @code{pkg}, some preconditions of the
system are checked, in particular the presence of the @code{pq} library
of Postgresql. If you have to install a package of your operating system
with @code{libpq}, you usually also need to install the so called
development package (named @code{libpq-dev} or similar).

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Concept
@chapter Introduction and package concept

To enable scripting of SQL access, particularly combinations of SQL
commands with temporary local storage or local processing of data, for
almost each SQL data type a corresponding representation of the data in
Octave is defined. This includes the SQL array types and user-defined
SQL composite types (row types) of arbitrary nesting depth. Octave
variables containing these corresponding representations are created by
the package if data is received from a database by a @code{select}
query, and correspondingly are used for sending data to the
database. This data exchange is lossless if the database backend allows
it (which is the case for Postgresql).

The representations of SQL types in Octave are the 'naturally'
corresponding Octave types, if possible. They can also be created
directly in Octave and sent to a database.

The package keeps a notion of all SQL types available in a
database. This information is automatically retrieved after
connecting. If the user creates new types with SQL commands, a package
function for refreshing the packages information on types must be called
for the type to be available within the same session. The same function
should be called if the session continues after deletion of types.

The package provides functions for issuing SQL commands whose text is
provided by the user. The command text can contain placeholders for
data. The data, corresponding to these placeholders, can be passed to
the function in separate arguments.

In queries, not only data is returned, but also information on data type
and column names.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node SQL data types
@chapter Representation in Octave of types defined by SQL
@cindex data types

For types specific to database implementations,
@mysee
@ref{Postgresql data types}.

The last column indicates whether the SQL type is automatically deduced
by this packages functions from the representation of the data in
Octave. If not, the correct SQL type must be specified by the user if
the data is sent from Octave to the database.

The listed names of SQL data types are those which are used by the
functions of this package. They are sometimes different from the
original SQL typenames, e.g. @code{int2}, @code{int4}, and @code{int8}
instead of @code{smallint}, @code{integer}, and @code{bigint},
respectively. If not obvious, the original SQL typename is given in
parantheses.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaa} {Octave type blah blah blah blah blah} {auto}
@headitem SQL @tab Octave @tab auto
@item bool
@tab logical scalar
@tab yes
@item bytea (variable length binary string)
@tab array of uint8, one-dimensional if converted from SQL data
@tab yes
@item float8
@tab double scalar
@tab yes
@item float4
@tab single scalar
@tab yes
@item varchar
@tab string
@tab no
@item bpchar (char)
@tab string
@tab no
@item int2
@tab int16 scalar
@tab yes
@item int4
@tab int32 scalar
@tab yes
@item int8
@tab int64 scalar
@tab yes
@item timestamp
@tab 8-byte-time-value (see below), positive or negative difference
to 2000-01-01 00:00
@tab no
@item timestamptz
@tab as timestamp
@tab no
@item time
@tab 8-byte-time-value (see below)
@tab no
@item timetz
@tab 2-element cell array with 8-byte-time-value (see below, time of
day) and int32 scalar (time zone in seconds, negative east of UTC)
@tab no
@item date
@tab int32 scalar, positive or negative difference to 2000-01-01
@tab no
@item interval
@tab 3-element cell array with 8-byte-time-value (see below), int32
(days), and int32 (months)
@tab no
@item bit
@tab structure with fields @code{bitlen} (int32, number of valid
bits) and @code{bits} (uint8 array, 8 bits per entry, first entry
contains the leftmost bits, last entry may contain less than 8 bits)
@tab no
@item varbit
@tab as bit
@tab yes
@item xml
@tab string
@tab no
@item any array
@tab Structure with fields @code{data} (holding a cell-array with
entries of a type corresponding to the SQL element type), @code{ndims}
(holding the number of dimensions of the corresponding SQL array, since
this can not be deduced from the dimensions of the Octave cell-array in
all cases), and optionally (but always present in returned values)
@code{lbounds} (a row vector of enumeration bases for all dimensions,
default is @code{ones (1, ndims)}; enumeration bases different from
@code{1} are supported e.g. by Postgresql). Array elements may not
correspond to arrays in SQL (use additional dimensions for this), but
may correspond to composite types, which is allowed to lead to
arbitrarily deep nesting.
@tab no
@item any composite type (row type)
@tab One-dimensional cell-array with entries of types corresponding
to the respective SQL types. Entries may also correspond to an
array-type or composite type; this is allowed to lead to arbitrarily
deep nesting.
@tab no
@end multitable

8-byte-time-value: int64 scalar, representing microseconds, if server is
configured for integer date/time; double scalar, representing seconds,
if server is configured for float date/time. If the type (integer or
float) of an input Octave variable for an 8-byte-time-value does not
match the server configuration, there is no automatic conversion but an
error is thrown.

Octaves @code{NA} corresponds to an SQL NULL value (not @code{NaN},
which is interpreted as a value of a float type!).


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Arbitrary Octave types
@chapter Storing arbitrary Octave types in a database
@cindex arbitrary Octave types

If Octave variable types have corresponding SQL types (
@mysee
@ref{SQL data types}
, also consider the links there to types specific for database
implementations), the variables can directly be stored in a database. If
not, the variables can be converted to representations of the SQL type
bytea and then stored. This way of storing is possible for all Octave
types which can be correctly saved and loaded with Octaves @code{save}
and @code{load} functions.

@menu
* var2bytea::                Converting Octave variables to bytea.
* bytea2var::                Converting bytea back to Octave variables.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node var2bytea
@section Converting Octave variables to bytea
@mfnindex var2bytea

@c include function helptext here
@c var2bytea var2bytea.cc
@anchor{XREFvar2bytea}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} {} var2bytea (@var{value}, @dots{})
Save input values in uint8 arrays in Octaves binary save format.

This function returns as many output variables as input variables
are given.

The function can be used to prepare storage of Octave variable
values as binary strings in a database, if the variables types have
no corresponding SQL type.
Each variable type which can be correctly saved and loaded with
Octaves @code{save} and @code{load} functions is acceptable.
The variable value can be restored with the function
@code{bytea2var}.

Note that the inputs are not variable names, but values.
No variable names are saved.
Loading the uint8 array with @code{load} (possibly after dumping
it to a file) will not work.

Example: to convert the first and third column of a cell-array @code{c},
@code{[c@{:, [1, 3]@}] = var2bytea (c@{:, [1, 3]@});}
can be used.

@seealso{@ref{XREFbytea2var,,bytea2var}}
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bytea2var
@section Converting bytea back to Octave variables
@mfnindex bytea2var

@c include function helptext here
@c bytea2var bytea2var.cc
@anchor{XREFbytea2var}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} {} bytea2var (@var{value}, @dots{})
Restore variable values from uint8 arrays generated with @code{var2bytea}.

Returns as many output variables as input variables are given.

@seealso{@ref{XREFvar2bytea,,var2bytea}}
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Setting options
@chapter Functions for setting or retrieving options
@cindex options

Some functions in 'database' accept options. These are set or retrieved
with the following functions.

@menu
* setdbopts::                   Setting options.
* getdbopts::                   Retrieving options.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node setdbopts
@section Function setdbopts for setting options in 'database'
@mfnindex setdbopts

@c include function help here
@c setdbopts ../inst/setdbopts.m
@anchor{XREFsetdbopts}
@deftypefn  {Function File} {} setdbopts ()
@deftypefnx {Function File} {} setdbopts (@var{par}, @var{val}, @dots{})
@deftypefnx {Function File} {} setdbopts (@var{old}, @var{par}, @var{val}, @dots{})
@deftypefnx {Function File} {} setdbopts (@var{old}, @var{new})
Create settings structure for database functions.

When called without any input or output arguments, 'setdbopts'
prints a list of all valid optimization parameters.

When called with one output and no inputs, return an options
structure with all valid option parameters initialized to '[]'.

When called with a list of parameter/value pairs, return an options
structure with only the named parameters initialized.

When the first input is an existing options structure OLD, the
values are updated from either the PAR/VAL list or from the options
structure NEW.

Please see individual database functions for valid settings.

(Most of this documentation and this functions code are copied from
Octaves 'optimset' function.)
@end deftypefn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node getdbopts
@section Function getdbopts for retrieving options in 'database'
@mfnindex getdbopts

This function is internally called by the functions of 'database'.

@c include function help here
@c getdbopts ../inst/getdbopts.m
@anchor{XREFgetdbopts}
@deftypefn  {Function File} {} getdbopts (@var{options}, @var{parname})
@deftypefnx {Function File} {} getdbopts (@var{options}, @var{parname}, @var{default})
Return a specific setting from a structure created by
@code{setdbopts}.  If @var{parname} is not a field of the @var{options}
structure, return @var{default} if supplied, otherwise return an
empty matrix.

(This function uses the code of Octaves 'optimget' function.)
@end deftypefn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Documentation
@chapter Function database_doc to view documentation
@cindex documentation
@mfnindex database_doc

@c include function helptext here
@c database_doc ../inst/database_doc.m
@anchor{XREFdatabase_doc}
@deftypefn {Function File} {} database_doc ()
@deftypefnx {Function File} {} database_doc (@var{keyword})
Show database package documentation.

Runs the info viewer Octave is configured with on the documentation
in info format of the installed database package. Without argument,
the top node of the documentation is displayed. With an argument,
the respective index entry is searched for and its node displayed.

@end deftypefn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Postgresql
@chapter Description of access to Postgresql databases
@cindex postgresql

@menu
* Postgresql data types::            Representation in Octave of types
                                       specific to Postgresql.
* Connection functions::             Functions related to the connection
                                       to a Postgresql database.
* Data exchange::                    Functions for data exchange with a
                                       Postgresql database.
* Examples::                         Examples for accessing Postgresql.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Postgresql data types
@section Representation in Octave of types specific to Postgresql
@cindex data types

For the general types, defined by SQL and potentially available in each
database implementation,
@mysee
@ref{SQL data types}.

The last column indicates whether the SQL type is automatically deduced
by this packages functions from the representation of the data in
Octave. If not, the correct SQL type must be specified by the user if
the data is sent from Octave to the database.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {Octave type blah blah blah blah blah} {auto}
@headitem Postgresql @tab Octave @tab auto
@item oid
@tab uint32 scalar
@tab yes
@item text
@tab string
@tab yes
@item name
@tab string of length < @code{NAMEDATALEN} (often 64)
@tab no
@item money
@tab int64 scalar, which is 100 times the currency value to enable
storing the 'small currency' (e.g. Cent) fraction in the last two
digits
@tab no
@item point
@tab geometric point data for one point (see below)
@tab yes
@item lseg
@tab geometric point data for two points (see below)
@tab yes
@item line (not yet implemented by postgresql-9.2.4)
@tab as lseg
@tab no
@item box
@tab as lseg
@tab no
@item circle
@tab real vector (but the restrictions for type uint8 as in geometric
element type apply, as explained below) with 3 elements, no. 1 and 2
centre coordinates, no. 3 radius
@tab yes
@item polygon
@tab geometric point data (see below)
@tab no
@item path
@tab structure with fields @code{closed} (boolean, is path closed?)
and @code{path} (geometric point data, see below).
@tab no
@item inet
@tab uint8 array of 4 or 5 elements for IPv4 or uint16 array of 8 or
9 elements for IPv6. 5th or 9th element, respectively, contain number
of set bits in network mask, the default (if there are only 4 or 8
elements, respectively) is all bits set.
@tab no
@item cidr
@tab as inet
@tab no
@item macaddr
@tab uint8 array of 6 elements
@tab no
@item uuid
@tab uint8 array of 16 elements
@tab no
@item any enum type
@tab string
@tab no
@end multitable

The 8-byte-time value (see time types in @ref{SQL data types}) can be an
int64 scalar, representing microseconds, if the Postgresql server is
configured for integer date/time, or a double scalar, representing
seconds, if the server is configured for float date/time
(deprecated). One can use @ref{pq_conninfo} to query the respective
server configuration.

Geometric point data: if converting from Octave data, any real array
(but if of type uint8, the geometric type name must always be specified,
for otherwise uint8 would be considered as bytea) with even number of
elements. Two adjacent elements (adjacent if indexed with a single
index) define a pair of 2D point coordinates. In converting from
Postgresql data, dimensions of Octave geometric point data will be
chosen to be (2, n_points) and elements will be of format double.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Connection functions
@section Functions related to the connection to a Postgresql database
@cindex database connection

@menu
* pq_connect::                Connecting to a Postgresql database.
* pq_close::                  Disconnecting from a Postgresql database.
* pq_conninfo::               Retrieving information on the
                              connection and on the server.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_connect
@subsection Connecting to a Postgresql database
@mfnindex pq_connect

@c include function help here
@c pq_connect ../inst/pq_connect.m
@anchor{XREFpq_connect}
@deftypefn {Function File} {@var{connection} =} pq_connect (@var{settings})
Establishes a connection to a postgresql server according to
@var{settings} and returns an @code{octave_pq_connection} object
@var{connection} which can be passed to other functions of the
package. There can be multiple connections. An
@code{octave_pq_connection} object contains information on a
connection and will be internally altered by the packages functions
even though it is only passed as an argument, i.e. Octaves 'pass by
value' semantics are not adhered to in this case.

@var{settings} can be set by @code{setdbopts} (copied from Octaves
@code{optimset}) and can contain (defaults depend on Postgresql):
@code{host} (hostname), @code{hostaddr} (numeric host address),
@code{port} (port to connect to), @code{dbname} (database to connect
to), @code{user} (user name to connect as), @code{password},
@code{connect_timeout}, @code{options} (command-line options to send
to the server at run-time, see Postgresql documentation),
@code{sslmode} (@code{disable}, @code{allow}, @code{prefer},
@code{require}, @code{verify-ca}, or @code{verify-full}; see
Postgresql documentation of SSL support), @code{sslcert} (file name
of client SSL certificate), @code{sslkey} (location of secret key for
client certificate, file name or external OpenSSL engine
(colon-separated engine name and an engine-specific key identifier)),
@code{sslrootcert} (file name of root SSL certificate), @code{sslcrl}
(file name of SSL certificate revocation list), @code{krbsrvname}
(kerberos service name), @code{service} (service name in
pq_service.conf to use for additional parameters).

All these settings are passed to the server as they are, so it may be
better to consult the postgresql documentation for them, e.g. the
documentation of the PQconnectdb function in libpq.
@seealso{@ref{XREFpq_exec_params,,pq_exec_params}, @ref{XREFpq_update_types,,pq_update_types}}
@end deftypefn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node  pq_close
@subsection Disconnecting from a Postgresql database
@mfnindex pq_close

@c include function help here
@c pq_close pq_close.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_close}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} pq_close (@var{connection})
Closes connection @var{connection} to a postgresql server.
@seealso{@ref{XREFpq_connect,,pq_connect}}
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_conninfo
@subsection Retrieving information on the connection and on the server
@mfnindex pq_conninfo

@c include function help here
@c pq_conninfo pq_conninfo.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_conninfo}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} {@var{val} =} pq_conninfo (@var{connection}, @var{label})
Retrieves connection information for postgresql connection @var{connection}, specified by the string @var{label}, and returns the value of this information in @var{val}. The type of @var{val} depends on the requested information. Currently, the only recognized @var{label} is @code{'integer_datetimes'}; @var{val} is @code{true} if 8-byte date and time values are stored as integer in the server, and @code{false} if they are stored as @code{double} (which is deprecated).
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Data exchange
@section Functions for data exchange with a Postgresql database
@cindex data exchange, Postgresql

@menu
* pq_exec_params::             Issuing SQL commands.
* pq_update_types::            Updating type information.

Large objects
* pq_lo_import::               Importing large objects into a database.
* pq_lo_export::               Exporting large objects from a database.
* pq_lo_unlink::               Deleting large objects from a database.
* pq_lo_view::                 Viewing large objects.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_exec_params
@subsection Issuing SQL commands
@mfnindex pq_exec_params

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_exec_params ../inst/pq_exec_params.m
@anchor{XREFpq_exec_params}
@deftypefn {Function File} pq_exec_params (@var{connection}, @var{command})
@deftypefnx {Loadable Function} pq_exec_params (@var{connection}, @var{command}, @var{params})
@deftypefnx {Loadable Function} pq_exec_params (@var{connection}, @var{command}, @var{settings})
@deftypefnx {Loadable Function} pq_exec_params (@var{connection}, @var{command}, @var{params}, @var{settings})

Sends the string @var{command}, which must contain a single SQL
command, over the connection @var{connection}. Parameters in
@var{command} can be replaced by $1, $2, etc and their values given
in the one-dimensional cell-array @var{params}. Parameters of
composite type sent this way must have their type defined in the
database. For typeconversions, the package maintains a notion of
defined types, which should be refreshed with @code{pq_update_types}
if types are defined or dropped after establishing the connection, or
if the schema search path changes. @var{settings} is a structure of
settings, it can be created by @code{setdbopts}.

Settings currently understood by @code{pq_exec_params}:

@table @code
@item param_types
One-dimensional cell-array with type specifications for parameters in
@var{params}. If present, must have the same length as @var{params}.
Entries may be empty if no specification is necessary (see below).
Type specifications are strings corresponding to the entries returned
by @code{SELECT typname FROM pg_type WHERE typarray != 0 OR typtype =
'c';}, optionally having @code{[]} appended (without space) to
indicate an array. Type specifications can be schema-qualified,
otherwise they refer to the visible type with that name.
@item copy_in_path, copy_out_path
Path to files at the client side for @code{copy from stdin} and
@code{copy to stdout}, respectively.
@item copy_in_from_variable
Logical scalar, default @code{false}. If @code{true}, @code{copy from
stdin} uses data from an Octave variable instead of from a file.
@item copy_in_data
2-dimensional cell-array with columns of suitable type (see below) --
will be used instead of a file as data for @code{copy from stdin} if
@code{copy_in_from_variable} is @code{true}.
@item copy_in_types
If some columns in @code{copy_in_data} need a type specification (see
below), @code{copy_in_types} has to be set to a cell-array with type
specifications, with an entry (possibly empty) for each column.
@item copy_in_with_oids
If you want to copy in with oids when using data from an Octave
variable, the first column of the data must contain the OIDs and
@code{copy_in_with_oids} has to be set to @code{true} (default
@code{false}); @code{with oids} should be specified together with
@code{copy from stdin} in the command, otherwise Postgresql will
ignore the copied oids.
@end table

There is no way to @code{copy to stdout} into an Octave variable, but
a @code{select} command can be used for this purpose.

@code{copy from stdin} from an Octave variable is only supported in
binary mode, so this has to be specified in the SQL command.

The output depends on the type of command.
@itemize
@item queries (commands potentially returning data):
The output will be a structure with fields @code{data} (containing
a cell array with the data, columns correspond to returned database
columns, rows correspond to returned tuples), @code{columns}
(containing the column headers), and @code{types} (a
structure-vector with the postgresql data types of the columns,
subfields @code{name} (string with typename), @code{is_array}
(boolean), @code{is_composite} (boolean), @code{is_enum} (boolean),
and @code{elements} (if @code{is_composite == true},
structure-vector of element types, containing fields corresponding
to those of @code{types})).
@item copy commands:
Nothing is returned (this may change in the future).
@item other commands:
The output will be the number of affected rows in the database.
@end itemize


@c The following block will be cut out in the package info file.

@seealso{@ref{XREFpq_update_types,,pq_update_types}, @ref{XREFpq_conninfo,,pq_conninfo}}
@end deftypefn


@subheading Type mapping

For the mapping of currently implemented Postgresql types to Octave
types,
@mysee
@ref{Postgresql data types}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_update_types
@subsection Updating type information
@mfnindex pq_update_types

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_update_types pq_update_types.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_update_types}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} pq_update_types (@var{connection})
Updates information on existing postgresql types for @var{connection}. Use this before @code{pq_exec_params} if types were created or dropped while the connection was already established or if the schema search path changed. A newly created connection will automatically retrieve this information at connection time.

@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_lo_import
@subsection Importing large objects into a database
@mfnindex pq_lo_import

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_lo_import pq_lo.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_lo_import}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} {@var{oid} =} pq_lo_import (@var{connection}, @var{path})
Imports the file in @var{path} on the client side as a large object into the database associated with @var{connection} and returns the Oid of the new large object. If @var{path} ends with a @code{|}, it is take as a shell command whose output is piped into a large object.
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_lo_export
@subsection Exporting large objects from a database
@mfnindex pq_lo_export

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_lo_export pq_lo.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_lo_export}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} pq_lo_export (@var{connection}, @var{oid}, @var{path})
Exports the large object of Oid @var{oid} in the database associated with @var{connection} to the file @var{path} on the client side. If @var{path} starts with a @code{|}, it is taken as a shell commant to pipe to.
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_lo_unlink
@subsection Deleting large objects from a database
@mfnindex pq_lo_unlink

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_lo_unlink pq_lo.cc
@anchor{XREFpq_lo_unlink}
@deftypefn {Loadable Function} pq_lo_unlink (@var{connection}, @var{oid})
Removes the large object of Oid @var{oid} from the database associated with @var{connection}.
@end deftypefn



@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node pq_lo_view
@subsection Viewing large objects
@mfnindex pq_lo_view

@c include function helptext here
@c pq_lo_view ../inst/pq_lo_view.m
@anchor{XREFpq_lo_view}
@deftypefn {Function File} pq_lo_view (@var{connection}, @var{oid}, @var{viewer})

Exports the large object of Oid @var{oid} in the database associated
with @var{connection} to a temporary file and starts the program
@var{viewer} in the background with the name of the temporary file as
argument.

The temporary file will be removed after termination of the viewer.

@end deftypefn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Examples
@section Examples for accessing Postgresql
@cindex postgresql examples
@cindex examples, postgresql

The examples assume that there is a database named @code{test} and you
have the necessary rights to access it without password (probably the
database is on a server at the local machine) as the default user,
i.e. the user with the same name as your current operating system
account.

Each example contains code for cleaning up, but, for more clarity, the
cleanup is not enforced with Octaves @code{unwind_protect} or with an
SQL transaction. If something goes wrong, you can drop the database
@code{test} -- this should assure purging any created large objects.

You can also type @code{demo pq_connect} to access some demo code. But
it is possibly more difficult to read. @code{test pq_connect} runs some
functionality tests. The preconditions (access to a database named
@code{test}) are the same as for the code in the current section.

@menu
* Large objects::                    Large objects.
* Copy in::                          Copy in from Octave variable.
* Composite types::                  Working with composite types.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Large objects
@subsection Large objects

@example

# connect
conn = pq_connect (setdbopts ("dbname", "test"));

# create table to store large object oids
pq_exec_params (conn, "create table programs (name text, image oid);")

# start transaction, so we don't miss storing the oid
pq_exec_params (conn, "begin;")

# download image, pipe it to a large objects and note its oid
# (you need `wget' to be installed)
oid = pq_lo_import (conn,
"wget -q -O - https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/images/screenshot.png |")

# write oid and program name into the table
pq_exec_params (conn,
                "insert into programs values ($1, $2);", @{"Octave", oid@})

# finish transaction
pq_exec_params (conn, "commit;")

# find and retrieve the oid searching for the program name
foid = pq_exec_params (conn,
                       "select image from programs where name = $1;",
                       @{"Octave"@}).data@{1@}

# view large object corresponding to found @code{foid}
# (you need `eog' to be installed, or change to another program able to
# display `.png')
pq_lo_view (conn, foid, "eog")

# cleanup (we don't use `begin;' and `rollback;' since the
# example should show an inner transaction instead)

pq_lo_unlink (conn, oid);

pq_exec_params (conn, "drop table programs;");

pq_close (conn);

@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Copy in
@subsection Copy in from Octave variable

@example

# connect
conn = pq_connect (setdbopts ("dbname", "test"));

# create table
pq_exec_params (conn,
                "create table testdata (a float8, b float8, label text);")

# generate data in Octave
data = horzcat (num2cell (reshape (linspace (3, 4, 10), [], 2)),
                @{"a"; "b"; "c"; "d"; "e"@})

# copy in to the table
pq_exec_params (conn, "copy testdata from stdin with (format binary);",
                setdbopts ("copy_in_from_variable", true,
                           "copy_in_data", data))

# retrieve the data from the table
rdata = pq_exec_params (conn, "select * from testdata;").data

# cleanup 

pq_exec_params (conn, "drop table testdata;");

pq_close (conn);

@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Composite types
@subsection Working with composite types

This is a more complicated example with nested composite types.

@example

# connect
conn = pq_connect (setdbopts ("dbname", "test"));

# create a first composite type, consisting of a boolean and an array of
# booleans
pq_exec_params (conn,
"create type complex_bool_array_type as (b bool, ba bool[]);")

# create a second composite type, consisting of a boolean and the first
# composite type
pq_exec_params (conn,
"create type complex_complex_bool_array_type as (b bool, c complex_bool_array_type);")

# create a table with one column, holding the second defined composite
# type
pq_exec_params (conn,
"create table complex_complex_bool_array (a complex_complex_bool_array_type);")

# to enable data exchange using the new types, update type infomation
pq_update_types (conn);

# construct a data element for an SQL array of booleans in Octave
d_arr = cell2struct (@{2; @{true, false; true, true@}@}, @{"ndims", "data"@})

# construct a data element for the first defined composite type in
# Octave
d_c1 = @{true; d_arr@};

# construct a data element for the second defined composite type in
# Octave
d_c2 = @{false; d_c1@};

# insert the data element of the second composite type into the table;
# note that in this case specification of the parameter type in
# `param_types' is necessary
pq_exec_params (conn,
                "insert into complex_complex_bool_array values ($1);",
                @{d_c2@},
                setdbopts ("param_types", @{"complex_complex_bool_array_type"@}))

# read contents of the table
result = pq_exec_params (conn, "select * from complex_complex_bool_array");



# only for demonstration purpouses, verify that the read data matches
# the element constructed in Octave;
# for this, the field `lbounds' is deleted from the returned data
#
# note that the verification would not work if we had constructed the
# data element with rows of cell-arrays instead of columns, which would
# also have been possible
rdata = result.data@{1@};
rdata@{2@}@{2@} = rmfield (rdata@{2@}@{2@}, "lbounds");
isequal (d_c2, rdata)

# view returned column names
result.columns

# view returned type information
result.types

# cleanup

pq_exec_params (conn, "drop table complex_complex_bool_array;")

pq_exec_params (conn, "drop type complex_complex_bool_array_type;")

pq_exec_params (conn, "drop type complex_bool_array_type;")

pq_close (conn);

@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Function index
@unnumbered Index of functions in database

@printindex mfn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Concept index
@unnumbered Concept index

@printindex cp

@bye
